this is a complex film that explores the effects of fordist and taylorist modes of industrial capitalist production on human relations . there are constant references to assembly line production , where workers are treated as cogs in a machine , overseen by managers wielding clipboards , controlling how much hair the workers leave exposed , and firing workers ( stanley ) who meet all criteria ( as his supervisor says , are always on time , are hard workers , do good work ) but who may in some unspecified future make a mistake . < br / > < br / > this system destroys families - stanley has to send his father to a nursing home ( where he quickly dies ) after stanley loses his job . iris ' daughter is a single teen mother who drops out of high school to take a job in the plant . references are made to the fact that now , with declining wages , both partners need to work , the implication being that there ' s nobody left at home to care for the kids . iris ' husband is dead from an illness , and with the multiple references in the film about the costs of medical care , the viewer must wonder if he might have lived with better and more costly care . iris ' brother in law gets abusive after yet another unsuccessful day at the unemployment office when his wife yells at him for buying a beer with her savings instead of leaving it for her face lift and / or teeth job ( even the working class with no stake in conventional bourgeois notions of perfection and beauty buy into them ) . the one reference to race in the film is through a black factory line worker whose husband is in jail ( presumably , he ' s also black , and black men suffer disproportionally high incarceration rates ) . she remarks that he , like her , " is doing time " - her family is composed of a prisoner and a wage slave . < br / > < br / > stanley , however , still believes in human relations and is therefore for most of the film outside of the system of fordist capitalism . he cares for his father in spite of the fact that it was his father ' s traveling salesman job that resulted in his illiteracy - he has not yet reduced human relations to a purely instrumental contract , as iris ' brother in law does ( suggesting that he " married the wrong sister " ) . he does not , as iris says , conform to the work - eat - sleep routine of everyone else ; rather , he uses technology and the techniques of industrial production in an artisanal and creative way , in a sort of bauhaus ideal . this was the dream of early modernists and 1920 ' s socialists ( such as the bauhaus ) - to use technology to provide for all basic needs , allowing for more free time for creative human work and fuller human relations . he is also outside of traditional gender relations . he cooks , he cleans , he cares for his family , and he knows how to iron . iris , on the other hand , lives in a traditionally male role - she ' s a factory worker , the mains source of income for her ( extended ) family , and she brings stanley into the public realm , traditionally off - limits to women . by teaching him to read and write , she gives him access to the world of knowledge , also traditionally gendered male . < br / > < br / > literacy here is used as a metaphor for the ( traditionally masculine ) public realm and the systems of circulation ( monetary , vehicular , cultural ) that enable participation in the public realm . without this access , stanley is feminized - the jobs open to him are cooking and cleaning . he is excluded from all regular circulations , unable to participate in the monetary ( can ' t open a bank account ) , in the vehicular ( can ' t get a driver ' s license , can ' t ride the bus ) , and in the social ( he asks if he exists if he can ' t write his name ) . < br / > < br / > after learning to read , he grabs books on auto repair , farming , and spirituality ( the bible ) . the word of god is therefore relativized , placed on the same value plane as how - to books . in fact , organized religion in general is only very occasionally present - the bible also appears on a dresser as the camera pans to find stanley and iris having sex . it is , however , acknowledged as a moral force - iris , clearly a character devoted to living a " good " life , mentions at the beginning of the film that her rosary was among the objects lost in a purse snatching . < br / > < br / > once able to read , he enters the system and lands a managerial position with a health care plan , a car , and a house , taking his place at the head of the family , the breadwinner . presumably , he ' s an industrial designer , dreaming up products that will require others enduring the drudgery of the assembly line to produce . this ending , probably the only bit of conventional hollywood in the film , is so incongruous with all that has come before that i at least wonder if it wasn ' t forced in by some studio exec suddenly worried about the lack of a feel - good ending and its potential effect on the bottom line . < br / > < br / > now that , according to the pundits , we ' ve comfortably moved on to post - industrial capitalism , the film also has a slightly nostalgic feel , as though we needed the historical distance to really analyze what happened during that period . < br / > < br / > nevertheless , it ' s highly recommended - at least if you want to exercise your brain . disregard the ending , and it ' s close to a perfect 10 . 